---
layout: post
title: "Two Cultures, Bitter Lesson"
date: 2026-06-09
tags: [machine-learning, statistics, ai]
---

Some time ago I read Leo Breiman's paper [Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures](https://projecteuclid.org/journals/statistical-science/volume-16/issue-3/Statistical-Modeling--The-Two-Cultures-with-comments-and-a/10.1214/ss/1009213726.full) (2001). Then recently I came across Rich Sutton's note [The Bitter Lesson](https://www.cs.utexas.edu/~eunsol/courses/data/bitter_lesson.pdf) (2019). I feel these two articles share one common idea: imposing human knowledge on the model can be detrimental to the model's performance and its generalization.

Breiman contrasts two distinct approaches within statistical modelling: data modelling and algorithmic modelling. The philosophy of data modelling is that the data are generated by a specific underlying stochastic process. This approach assumes we can understand the process well enough to write a mathematical model approximating reality. Such models typically require certain assumptions about the relationship between predictors and response. But the more patterns we want to extract from the data, the more complex the model becomes, and its interpretability gradually decreases. If the primary goal is accurate prediction on new data, perhaps we can trade some interpretability for flexibility: make fewer assumptions and let the method figure out the patterns on its own. This is where algorithmic models come in: much more flexible and free from strong assumptions about the data's underlying structure.

In The Bitter Lesson, Rich Sutton argues that many practitioners want to leverage their domain knowledge by manually encoding discovered patterns into their models. This is more psychologically satisfying than simply letting the machine figure out the underlying process. Instead, Sutton emphasizes the importance of computationally expensive but more general methods that automatically capture complexity from the data. He supports this with examples from various fields where brute-force algorithmic approaches beat methods with hand-crafted human knowledge built in.


New methods allow us learn from the data without specifying the underlying process explicitly. However, it raises some questions: how do we know the model is learning the right patterns? How can we ensure correct predictions on rare events? How can we convince ourselves to trust the model's predictions? 

"We want AI agents that can discover like we can, not which contain what we have discovered" (Rich Sutton). Sounds like 2026, right?

